\prefacesection{Abstract}

\vspace{-7mm}

<!--350 words-->

Assessing, managing, and communicating variance and risk is fundamental to
effective ecological decision making. One promising approach is to borrow
concepts from financial portfolio management. Ecological populations behave
like portfolios in many ways---we can treat the abundance of populations, such
as salmon in streams, as financial stock value, and groups of populations, such
as salmon within a river catchment, as portfolios. If a group of populations
react differently to an environmental event then the probability of sudden
decline may be lowered, similar to a diversified financial portfolio. This risk
reduction has been referred to as the portfolio effect. In this thesis I
consider three applications of portfolio concepts to ecology. I begin by
evaluating ways of estimating portfolio effects and applying these metrics to
moth, reef fish, and salmon metapopulations from around the world. I show an
inherent bias to a commonly used method, develop a new method based on Taylor's
power law of mean--variance scaling, and outline recommendations for estimating
portfolio effects. Next, I use a portfolio approach to inform conservation
priorities for salmon populations under a changing climate. I show that
preserving a diversity of thermal tolerances minimizes risk and ensures
persistence given long-term environmental change. However, this reduction in
variability can come at the expense of long-term persistence if climate change
increasingly restricts available habitat, forcing ecological managers to
balance society's desire for short-term stability and long-term viability.
Finally, I take the concept of black swans (extreme and unexpected events) from
the financial literature and ask what the evidence is for these events across
hundreds of bird, mammal, insect, and fish abundance time series. I find strong
evidence for the infrequent (3--5%) occurrence of ecological black swans. Black
swans are predominantly (87%) downward events and tend to be associated with
extreme climate, natural enemies (predators and parasites), or the combined
effects of multiple factors, with little relationship to life history. My
thesis demonstrates the importance of conserving ecological properties that may
contribute to portfolio effects, such as thermal-tolerance diversity and
habitat heterogeneity, and developing conservation strategies that are robust
to unexpected extreme events.

\smallskip

<!--\noindent \textbf{Keywords}: biocomplexity; catastrophes; diversity--stability;-->
<!--modern portfolio theory; response diversity; synchrony-->

<!--\renewcommand{\baselinestretch}{\textstretch} %% get normal spacing-->
<!--\normalsize-->
