\prefacesection{Acknowledgments}

\vspace{-7mm}
\renewcommand{\baselinestretch}{1.18}
\normalsize

I am first thankful to Nick Dulvy and Andy Cooper for their helpful guidance
and for giving me the freedom and encouragement to work on a broad set of
topics beyond my thesis. Thanks to Jon Moore for insightful discussions about
my work and for his contributions to Chapter 3 of this thesis, together with
those of Michelle McClure's. I am grateful to Trevor Branch and the School of
Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences for hosting me in Seattle in 2011--12. I also
thank Trevor for the ideas that sparked Chapter 4, and for his quick and
enthusiastic feedback. Thanks to Leah Gerber and Arne Mooers for acting as
external and internal examiners of this thesis and to Chris Kennedy for
chairing my thesis defence. I am grateful for funding from NSERC, Fulbright
Canada, a Garfield Weston Foundation / BC Packers Ltd. Graduate Fellowship in
Marine Sciences, SFU, Nick Dulvy, and Andy Cooper.

I have been fortunate to be surrounded by wonderful groups of grad students
and postdocs both during my time in the Earth to Oceans group and at the
University of Washington. Thanks to all of you for enriching my past four
years. In particular, thanks to Noel Swain, Rowan and Laurel Trebilco, Jordy
Thomson, Chris Mull, Michelle Nelson---my time at Wall St. was a blast. Mike
Beakes and Corey Phillis, you kept me sane. Justin Yeakel, thanks for geeking
out with me about the quantitative part of quantitative ecology. Cole
Monnahan, Melissa Muradian, and Peter Kuriyama, thanks for being my home away
from home.

Thanks to the members of the NESCent working group on extinction risk for
helping me think on 100 million year time scales---especially Seth Finnegan and
Paul Harnik. Our main project has now outlived my thesis. I am very
appreciative of Heike Lotze for setting me up so well on my scientific path and
for continuing to do so. Thanks to my co-developers of ss3sim for exploring the
depths of stock assessment with me.

Finally, I'm deeply thankful to my family for supporting me through all these
years of education. To Gran, you've instilled in me the value of education and
shown a keen interest in my work. To my parents, you've always given me the
freedom and encouragement to work on whatever interests me. Mom and Dad, look
how far I've come since you taught me how to write my first research paper and
the joys of Reverse Polish notation calculators 25 years ago! And to Sacha,
thank you for your unwavering support---you've made the years I've spent
working on this thesis immeasurably better.

\renewcommand{\baselinestretch}{\textstretch} %% get normal spacing
\normalsize
