\section{Supporting materials: Evidence for black-swan events in animal populations}
%!TEX root = anderson-etal-blackswan-timeseries.tex

\begin{centering}
\LARGE
%\[1.0em]
\end{centering}

\subsection{Data selection}

We applied the following data selection and quality-control rules to the
Global Population Dynamics Database (GPDD):

\begin{enumerate}

\item To remove populations with unreliable population indices that could be
  strongly confounded with economics and sampling effort, we removed all
  populations with a sampling protocol listed as \texttt{harvest} as well
  populations with the words \texttt{harvest} or \texttt{fur} in the cited
  reference title.

\item We removed all populations with uneven sampling intervals, i.e.\ we
  removed populations that did not have a constant difference between the
  ``decimal year begin'' and ``decimal year end'' columns.

\item We removed all populations rated as $< 2$ in the GPDD quality assessment
  (on a scale of $1$ to $5$, with $1$ being the lowest quality data)
  \citep[following][]{sibly2005, ziebarth2010}.

\item Populations with negative abundance values were removed. Of the
  populations that remained at the end of our other filtering rules, the
  remaining populations with negative abundances listed were all from time
  series that had been standardized by subtracting the mean and dividing by the
  standard deviation. We verified this by locating the original papers the
  datasets were extracted from: \citet{colebrook1978} for zooplankton and
  \citet{lindstrom1995} for grouse. Since the papers did not include the
  original mean time-series values we could not back transform these data
  points.

\item We filled in all missing time steps with \texttt{NA} values and imputed
  single missing values with the geometric mean of the previous and following
  values. We chose a geometric mean to be linear on the log scale that the
  Gompertz and Ricker-logistic models were fit on.

\item We filled in single recorded values of zero with the lowest non-zero
  value in the time series \citep[following][]{brook2006a}. This assumes that
  single values of zero result from abundance being low enough that censusing
  overlooked individuals that were actually present. We turned multiple zero
  values in a row into \texttt{NA} values. This implies that multiple zero
  values were either censusing errors or caused by emigration. Regardless, our
  population models were fit on a multiplicative (log) scale and so could not
  account for zero abundance. To avoid distorting the original data too
  strongly, we removed populations in which we filled in more than four zeros.

\item We removed all populations without at least four unique values
  \citep[following][]{brook2006a}.

\item We removed all populations with four or more identical values in a row
  since these suggest either recording error or extrapolation between two
  observations.

\item We then wrote an algorithm to find the longest unbroken window of
  abundance (no \texttt{NA}s) with at least $20$ time steps in each population
  time series. If there were any populations with multiple windows of identical
  length, we took the most recent window. This is a longer window than used in
  some previous analyses \citep[e.g.][]{brook2006a}, but since our model
  attempts to capture the shape of the distribution tails, our model requires
  more data.

\item We removed GPDD Main IDs \texttt{20531} and \texttt{10139}, which we
  noticed were duplicates of \texttt{20579} (a heron population).
  \texttt{20579} contained additional years of data not present in
  \texttt{10139}. We removed a limited number of populations from class
  Angiospermopsida and Bacillariophyceae to focus the taxonomy in our analysis
  on animals. We also removed any populations with an \texttt{Unknown}
  taxonomic class.

\item Finally, we removed populations with the following GPDD Main IDs, which
  we discovered were data entry errors when verifying the populations with
  suspected black swans: \texttt{1207} because the 1957 data point was entered
  as 2 but should have been 27 \citep{kendeigh1982}, \texttt{6531} because the
  1978 data point was entered as 7 but should have been 47 \citep{minot1986},
  and \texttt{6566} because some of the data did not match the graph
  \citep{heessen1996}.

\end{enumerate}

\noindent
We provide a supplemental figure of all the time series included in our
analysis and indicate which values were interpolated (non-zero interpolations)
(\percImputedPops\% of populations had at least one point interpolated but
only \percImputedPoints\% of the total observations were interpolated)
(Fig.~\ref{fig:all-ts}). Note that interpolation is highly unlikely to lead to
black-swan detections, since black swans involve extreme increases or
decreases. Table~\ref{tab:stats} shows the final taxonomic breakdown and the
number of populations with interpolated values.

\subsection{Details on the heavy-tailed Gompertz probability model}

For the Gompertz model, our weakly-informative priors (Fig.~\ref{fig:priors})
were:
\begin{align*}
b &\sim \mathrm{Uniform}(-1, 2)\\ \lambda &\sim \mathrm{Normal}(0, 10^2)\\
\sigma &\sim \mathrm{Half\mhyphen Cauchy} (0, 2.5)\\ \nu &\sim
\mathrm{Truncated\mhyphen Exponential}(0.01, \mathrm{min.} = 2).
\end{align*}
Our prior on $b$ was uninformative between values of $-1$ and $2$. We would
not expect values of $b$ with levels of density dependence as low as $-1$
(very strong inverse density dependence), nor would we generally expect values
above $1$. We allowed values of $b$ above $1$ to allow for non-stationary time
series of growth rates. The estimates of $b$ were well within these bounds.
Our prior on $\lambda$ was very weakly informative within the range of
expected values for population growth and is similar to the default priors
suggested by \citet{gelman2008d} for intercepts of regression models. Our
Half-Cauchy prior on $\sigma$ follows \citet{gelman2006c} and
\citet{gelman2008d} and the specific scale parameter of $2.5$ is based on our
expected range of the value in nature from previous studies
\citep[e.g.][]{connors2014}. In our testing of a subsample of populations, our
parameter estimates were not qualitatively changed by switching to an
uninformative uniform prior on $\sigma$, but the weakly informative
Half-Cauchy prior substantially sped up chain convergence.

Our prior on $\nu$ was based on \citet{fernandez1998}. They chose an
exponential rate parameter of $0.1$. We chose a less informative rate
parameter of $0.01$ and truncated the distribution at $2$, since at $\nu < 2$
the variance of the t distribution is undefined. This prior gives only a
$7.7$\% probability that $\nu < 10$ but constrains the sampling sufficiently
to avoid wandering off towards infinity---above approximately $\nu = 20$ the t
distribution is so similar to the normal distribution
(Fig.~\ref{fig:didactic}) that time series of the length considered here are
unlikely to be informative about the precise value of $\nu$. In the scenario
where the data are uninformative about heavy tails
(e.g.~Fig.~\ref{fig:didactic}e,~h), the posterior will approximately match the
prior (prior median $= 71$, mean $= 102$) and the metrics used in our paper
(e.g.~Pr$(\nu < 10) > 0.5$) are unlikely to flag the population as heavy
tailed.

We fit our models with Stan 2.4.0 \citep{stan-manual2014}, and R 3.1.1
\citep{r2014}. We began with four chains and $2000$ iterations, discarding the
first $1000$ as warm up (i.e.~4000 total samples). If $\hat{R}$ (the potential
scale reduction factor---a measure of chain convergence) was greater than
$1.05$ for any parameter or the minimum effective sample size,
$n_\mathrm{eff}$, (a measure of the effective number of uncorrelated samples)
for any parameter was less than $200$, we doubled both the total iterations
and warm up period and sampled from the model again. These thresholds are in
excess of the minimums recommended by \citet{gelman2006a} of $\hat{R} < 1.1$
and effective sample size $> 100$ for reliable point estimates and confidence
intervals. In the majority of cases our minimum thresholds were greatly
exceeded. We continued this procedure up to $8000$ iterations ($16000$ total
samples) by which all chains were deemed to have sufficiently converged. These
chain lengths may seem low to those familiar with software such as WinBUGS or
JAGS, but the No-U-Turn Hamiltonian Markov chain Monte Carlo Sampler in Stan
generally requires far fewer iterations to obtain equivalent effective sample
sizes \citep{stan-manual2014}.

\subsection{Alternative priors}

To test if the prior on $\nu$ influenced our estimate of black-swan dynamics,
we refit our models with weaker and stronger priors. Our base model used a
prior on $\nu$ of Truncated-Exponential(0.02, min.\ = 2). For a weaker prior
we used Truncated-Exponential(0.005, min.\ = 2) and for a stronger prior we
used Truncated-Exponential(0.02, min.\ = 2) (Fig.~\ref{fig:priors}). Note that
the base and weaker priors are relatively flat within the region of $\nu <
20$, which is the region we are mostly concerned about when categorizing populations
as heavy- or thin-tailed.

Our results show that these weaker and stronger priors would have little
influence on our conclusions about heavy-tailed dynamics
(Fig.~\ref{fig:alt-priors}). When the data are informative about tail
behaviour (i.e.\ when there is strong evidence of low $\nu$ values,
upper-right of Fig.~\ref{fig:alt-priors}), the prior has little impact on the
estimate of $\nu$. When the data are less informative about $\nu$ (i.e.\ when
there are no or few tail events and time series are short or noisy), the prior
can pull the estimate of $\nu$ towards larger or smaller values
(Fig.~\ref{fig:alt-priors}). The vast majority of the populations with Pr$(\nu
< 10)$ in the base prior were not altered qualitatively by this range of prior
strength.

\subsection{Alternative population models}

We fit four alternative population models to the time-series data to check how
they would influence our conclusions. Our alternative models allowed for
autocorrelation in the residuals, assumed no density dependence, allowed for
observation error, or assumed a Ricker-logistic functional form. The range of
percentages of black swans by taxonomic class cited in the abstract and
results are based on lower and upper limits across our main Gompertz model and
these four alternative models.

\subsubsection{Autocorrelated residuals}

We considered a version of the Gompertz model in which an autoregressive
parameter was fit to the process noise residuals:
\begin{align*}
x_t &= \lambda + b x_{t-1} + \epsilon_t\\
\epsilon_t &\sim \mathrm{Student\mhyphen t}(\nu, \phi \epsilon_{t-1}, \sigma).
\end{align*}
In addition to the parameters in the original Gompertz model, this model
estimates an additional parameter $\phi$, which represents the correlation of
subsequent residuals. Based on the results of previous analyses with the GPDD
\citep[e.g.][]{connors2014} and the chosen priors in previous analyses
\citep[e.g.][]{thorson2014a} and to greatly speed up chain convergence when
running our model across all populations, we placed a weakly informative prior
on $\phi$ that assumed the greatest probability density near zero with the
reduced possibility of $\phi$ being near $-1$ or $1$. Specifically, we chose
$\phi \sim \mathrm{Truncated\mhyphen Normal}(0, 1, \mathrm{min.} = -1,
\mathrm{max.} = 1)$. The MCMC chains did not converge for
\modelsNoConvergeAROne\ populations according to our criteria ($\widehat{R} <
1.05, n_\mathrm{eff} > 200$) after 8000 iterations of four chains. This
  included only \modelsNoConvergeAROneHeavyBase\ populations in which Pr($\nu
  < 10$) $> 0.5$ categorized them as heavy in the main Gompertz model. We did
  not include these models in Fig.~\ref{fig:alt}.

\subsubsection{Assumed density independence}\label{assumed-density-independence}

We fit a simplified version of the Gompertz model in which the density
dependence parameter $b$ was fixed at $1$ (density independent). This is
equivalent to fitting a random walk model (with drift) to the $\log$
abundances or assuming the growth rates are drawn from a stationary
distribution. The model was as follows:
\begin{align*}
x_t &= \lambda + x_{t-1} + \epsilon_t\\
\epsilon &\sim \mathrm{Student\mhyphen t}(\nu, 0, \sigma).
\end{align*}
We fit this model for three reasons: (1) it is computationally simpler and so
provides a check that our more complicated full Gompertz model was obtaining
reasonable estimates of $\nu$, (2) it provides a test of whether density
dependence was systematically affecting our perception of heavy tails, (3) it
matches how some previous authors have modelled heavy tails without accounting
for density dependence \citep{segura2013}.

\subsubsection{Assumed observation error}

Observation error can bias parameter estimates \citep[e.g.][]{knape2012} and
is known to affect the ability to detect extreme events \citep{ward2007}. In
our main analysis, we fit a model that ignored observation error. One way to
account for observation error would be to fit a full state-space model that
simultaneously estimates the magnitude of process noise and observation error.
However, simultaneously estimating observation and process noise is a
challenging problem (e.g.\ because the observation and process noise
parameters tend to negatively covary in model fitting) and is known to
sometimes result in identifiability issues with the Gompertz population model
\citep{knape2008}. Furthermore, our model was applied to hundreds of time
series, often of short length (as few as 20 time steps) and our model
estimates an additional parameter---the shape of the process deviation
tails---potentially making identifiability and computational issues even
greater. Therefore, we considered a version of the base Gompertz model that
allowed for a fixed level of observation error:
\begin{align*}
U_t &= \lambda + b U_{t-1} + \epsilon_t\\
x_t &\sim \mathrm{Normal}(U_t, \sigma_\mathrm{obs}^2)\\
\epsilon_t &\sim \mathrm{Student\mhyphen t}(\nu, 0, \sigma_\mathrm{proc}),
\end{align*}
where $U$ represents the unobserved state vector, $\sigma_\mathrm{obs}$
represents the standard deviation of observation error (on a log scale), and
$\sigma_\mathrm{proc}$ represent the process noise scale parameter. We set
$\sigma_\mathrm{obs}$ to $0.2$, which represents the upper limit of values
often used in simulation analyses \citep[e.g.][]{valpine2002, thorson2014b}.

\subsubsection{Ricker-logistic}

We also fit a Ricker-logistic model:
\begin{align*}
x_t &= x_{t-1} + r_{\mathrm{max}}\left(1 - \frac{N_{t-1}}{K}\right) + \epsilon_t\\
\epsilon_t &\sim \mathrm{Student\mhyphen t}(\nu, 0, \sigma),
\end{align*}
where $r_\mathrm{max}$ represents the theoretical maximum population growth
rate that is obtained when $N_t$ (abundance at time $t$) $= 0$. The parameter
$K$ represents the carrying capacity and, as before, $x_t$ represents the
$\log$ transformed abundance at time $t$. The Ricker-logistic model assumes a
linear decrease in population growth rate with increases in abundance. In
contrast, the Gompertz model assumes a linear decrease in population growth
rate with increases in \textit{log} abundance ($x_t$)
\citep[e.g.][]{thibaut2012}.

To fit the Ricker-logistic models, we chose a prior on $K$ uniform between
zero and twice the maximum observed abundance (\citet{clark2010} chose uniform
between zero and maximum observed, which is more informative). We set the
prior on $r_\mathrm{max}$ as uniform between 0 and 20 as in \citet{clark2010}.
We used the same priors on $\nu$ and $\sigma$ as in the Gompertz model.

\subsection{Simulation testing the model}

We performed two types of simulation testing. First, we tested how easily the
Student-t distribution $\nu$ parameter could be recovered given different true
values of $\nu$ and different sample sizes. Second, we tested the ability of
the heavy-tailed Gompertz model to obtain unbiased parameter estimates of
$\nu$ given that a set of process deviations was provided in which the
effective $\nu$ value was close to the true $\nu$ value.

We separated our simulation into these two components to avoid confounding two
issues. (1) With smaller sample sizes, there may not be a stochastic draw from
the tails of a distribution. In that case, no model, no matter how perfect,
will be able to detect the shape of the tails. (2) Complex models may return
biased parameter estimates if there are conceptual, computational, or coding
errors. Our first simulation tested the first issue and our second simulation
tested the latter. In general, our simulations show that, if anything, our
model under predicts the magnitude and probability of heavy tailed
events---especially given the length of the time series in the GPDD.

\subsubsection{Estimating $\nu$ from a stationary t distribution}

First, we tested the ability to estimate $\nu$ given different true values of
$\nu$ and different sample sizes. We took stochastic draws from t
distributions with different $\nu$ values ($\nu = 3, 5, 10,$ and $10^6$
[$\approx$ normal]), with central tendency parameters of $0$, and scale
parameters of $1$. We started with $1600$ stochastic draws and then fit the
models again at the first $800, 400, 200, 100, 50,$ and $25$ draws. Each time
we recorded the posterior samples of $\nu$.

We found that we could consistently and precisely recover median posterior
estimates of $\nu$ near the true value of $\nu$ with large samples ($\ge 200$)
(Fig.~\ref{fig:sim-nu} upper panels). At smaller samples we could still
usually qualitatively distinguish heavy from not-heavy tails, but the model
tended to underestimate how heavy the tails were. At the same time, at smaller
sample sizes, the model tended to overestimate how large the scale parameter
was (Fig.~\ref{fig:sim-nu} lower panels).

\subsubsection{Heavy-tailed Gompertz model simulations}

In the second part of our simulation testing, we tested the ability of the
heavy-tailed Gompertz model to obtain unbiased parameter estimates when the
process noise was chosen so that appropriate tail events were present. To
generate these process deviations for the $\nu = 3$ and $\nu = 5$ scenarios,
we repeatedly drew proposed candidate process deviations and estimated the
central tendency, scale, and $\nu$ values each time. We recorded when
$\hat{\nu}$ (median of the posterior) was within $0.2$ CVs (coefficient of
variations) of the true $\nu$ value and used this set of random seed values in
our Gompertz simulation. The following simplified R code illustrates this
procedure (the actual code is available at
\url{https://github.com/seananderson/heavy-tails}):

\begin{footnotesize}
\begin{verbatim}
get_effective_nu_seeds <- function(nu_true = 5, cv = 0.2, N = 50, seed_N = 20) {
  # nu_true: The true nu value
  # cv:      The permitted effective nu coefficient of variation
  # N:       The length of time series
  # seed_N:  The number of seed values to generate
  seeds <- numeric(length = seed_N)
  seed_value <- 0
  for (i in seq_len(seed_N)) {
    nu_close <- FALSE
    while (!nu_close) {
      seed_value <- seed_value + 1
      set.seed(i)
      y <- rt(N, df = nu_true)
      sm <- rstan::stan(... # fit the Stan model here
      med_nu_hat <- median(rstan::extract(sm, pars = "nu")[[1]])
      if (med_nu_hat > (nu_true - cv) & med_nu_hat < (nu_true + cv)) {
        nu_close <- TRUE
        seeds[i] <- seed_value
      }
    }
  }
  seeds
}
nu_3_seeds_N50 <- get_effective_nu_seeds(nu_true = 3)
nu_5_seeds_N50 <- get_effective_nu_seeds(nu_true = 5)
\end{verbatim}
\end{footnotesize}

We then fit our Gompertz models to the simulated datasets with all parameters
(except $\nu$) set near the median values estimated in the GPDD. We repeated
this with $50$ and $100$ samples without observation error, $50$ samples with
observation error ($\sigma_\mathrm{obs} = 0.2$), and $50$ samples with the
same observation error and a Gompertz model that allowed for correctly
specified observation error magnitude. Our results indicate that the Gompertz
model can recapture the true value of $\nu$ when the process noise was chosen
so that appropriate tail events were present (Fig.~\ref{fig:sim-prob} upper
panels). The addition of observation error caused the model to tend to
underestimate the degree of heavy-tailedness. Fitting a model with correctly
specified observation error did not make substantial improvements to model
bias (Fig.~\ref{fig:sim-prob}).

%(Figs~\ref{fig:sim-gompertz} and \ref{fig:sim-gompertz-boxplots}, red and
%green symbols in the top rows). Likewise, the other Gompertz parameters were
%estimated without any systematic bias (Figs~\ref{fig:sim-gompertz} and
%\ref{fig:sim-gompertz-boxplots}, red and green symbols). , overestimate the
%magnitude of process noise, somewhat overestimate $\lambda$, and overestimate
%density dependence (blue symbols in Figs~\ref{fig:sim-gompertz} and
%\ref{fig:sim-gompertz-boxplots}). The overestimation of density dependence
%with observation error is a known phenomenon \citep{knape2012}. Fitting a
%model with correctly specified observation error made marginal improvements
%to model bias (purple symbols in Figs~\ref{fig:sim-gompertz} and
%\ref{fig:sim-gompertz-boxplots}).

When converting the posterior distributions of $\nu$ into Pr($\nu < 10$), the
models distinguished heavy and not-heavy tails reasonably well
(Fig.~\ref{fig:sim-prob} lower panels). Without observation error, and using a
probability of $0.5$ as a threshold, the model correctly classified all
simulated systems with normally distributed process noise as not heavy tailed.
The model would have miscategorized only one of $40$ simulations at $\nu = 5$
across simulated populations with $50$ or $100$ time steps
(Fig.~\ref{fig:sim-prob}, scenarios 1 and 2 in lower row, second panel from
left). The model would have correctly categorized all cases where the process
noise was not heavy tailed (Fig.~\ref{fig:sim-prob} bottom-right panel) and
all cases where $\nu = 3$ and there was not observation error. With $0.2$
standard deviations of observation error, the model still categorized
\obsErrorNuFivePerc\% of cases as heavy tailed when $\nu = 5$ and all but one
case when $\nu = 3$. Allowing for observation error made little improvement to
the detection of heavy tails. Therefore, we chose to focus on the simpler
model without observation error in the main text, particularly given that the
true magnitude of observation error was unknown in the empirical data.

\subsection{Modelling covariates of heavy-tailed dynamics}

We fit a multilevel beta regression model to the predicted probability of
heavy tails, Pr($\nu < 10$), to investigate potential covariates of
heavy-tailed dynamics. The beta distribution is useful when response data
range on a continuous scale between zero and one \citep{ferrari2004}. We used
a logit link function as is typically used in logistic regression. The model
was as follows:

\begin{align*}
\mathrm{Pr}(\nu_i < 10) &\sim \mathrm{Beta}(A_i, B_i)\\
\mu_i &= \mathrm{logit}^{-1}(\alpha
  + \alpha^\mathrm{class}_{j[i]}
  + \alpha^\mathrm{order}_{k[i]}
  + \alpha^\mathrm{species}_{l[i]}
  + X_i \beta),
  \: \text{for } i = 1, \dots, 617\\
A_i &= \phi_\mathrm{disp} \mu_i\\
B_i &= \phi_\mathrm{disp} (1 - \mu_i)\\
\alpha^\mathrm{class}_j &\sim
  \mathrm{Normal}(0, \sigma^2_{\alpha \; \mathrm{class}}),
  \: \text{for } j = 1, \dots, 6\\
\alpha^\mathrm{order}_k &\sim
  \mathrm{Normal}(0, \sigma^2_{\alpha \; \mathrm{order}}),
  \: \text{for } k = 1, \dots, 38\\
\alpha^\mathrm{species}_l &\sim
  \mathrm{Normal}(0, \sigma^2_{\alpha \; \mathrm{species}}),
  \: \text{for } l = 1, \dots, 301,
\end{align*}
where $A$ and $B$ represent the beta distribution shape parameters; $\mu_i$
represents the predicted value for population $i$, class $j$, order $k$, and
species $l$; $\phi_\mathrm{disp}$ represents the dispersion parameter; and
$X_i$ represents a vector of predictors (such as lifespan) for population $i$
with associated $\beta$ coefficients. The intercepts are allowed to vary from
the overall intercept $\alpha$ by taxonomic class ($\alpha^\mathrm{class}_j$),
taxonomic order ($\alpha^\mathrm{order}_k$), and species
($\alpha^\mathrm{species}_l$) with standard deviations $\sigma_{\alpha \;
  \mathrm{class}}$, $\sigma_{\alpha \; \mathrm{order}}$, and $\sigma_{\alpha
  \; \mathrm{species}}$. Where possible, we also allowed for error
distributions around the predictors by incorporating the standard deviation of
the posterior samples for the Gompertz parameters $\lambda$, $b$, and $\log
\sigma$ around the mean point value as normal distributions (not shown in the
above equation).

We log transformed $\sigma$, time-series length, and lifespan to match the way
they are visually represented in Fig.~\ref{fig:correlates} and to make the
relationship approximately linear on the logit-transformed response scale. All
input variables were standardized by subtracting their mean and dividing by
two standard deviations to make their coefficients comparable in magnitude
\citep{gelman2008c}. We excluded body length as a covariate because it was
highly correlated with lifespan, and lifespan exhibited more overlap across
taxonomy than body length. Lifespan is also more directly related to time and
potential mechanisms driving black-swan dynamics.

We incorporated weakly informative priors into our model: $\mathrm{Cauchy}(0,
10)$ on the global intercept $\alpha$, $\mathrm{Half\mhyphen Cauchy}(0, 2.5)$
on all standard deviation parameters, $\mathrm{Half\mhyphen Cauchy}(0, 10)$ on
the dispersion parameter $\phi_\mathrm{disp}$, and $\mathrm{Cauchy}(0, 2.5)$
on all other parameters \citep{gelman2006c, gelman2008d}. Compared to normal
priors, the Cauchy priors concentrate more probability density around expected
parameter values while allowing for a higher probability density far into the
tails, thereby allowing the data to dominate the posterior more strongly if it
disagrees with the prior. Our conclusions were not qualitatively changed by
using uniform priors. We fit our models with 5000 total iterations per chain,
2500 warm-up iterations, four chains, and discarding every second sample to
save memory. We checked for chain convergence visually and with the same
criteria as before ($\widehat{R} < 1.05$ and $n_\mathrm{eff} >200$ for all
parameters).

To derive taxonomic-order-level estimates of the probability of heavy tails
accounting for time-series length (Fig.~\ref{fig:posteriors}a), we fit a
separate multilevel model with the same structure but with only $\log$
time-series length as a predictor. (In this case, we did not want to control
for intrinsic population characteristics such as density dependence.) Since
our predictors were centered by subtracting their mean value, we obtained
order-level estimates of the probability of heavy tails at mean log
time-series length by adding the posteriors for $\alpha$,
$\alpha^\mathrm{class}_j$, and $\alpha^\mathrm{order}_k$.

\subsection{Additional acknowledgements}

Many of the silhouette images used in Figs~\ref{fig:nu-coefs},
\ref{fig:correlates} and \ref{fig:posteriors} were obtained from
\texttt{phylopic.org} under Creative Commons licenses. We vectorized the
salmon in Fig.~\ref{fig:nu-coefs} and Fig.~\ref{fig:correlates} ourselves. The
bird in these figures was obtained from \texttt{phylopic.org} under a Creative
Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported license with credit to Jean-Raphaël
Guillaumin {[}photography{]} and T. Michael Keesey {[}vectorization{]}). The
silhouettes in Fig.~\ref{fig:posteriors} were obtained from the following
sources (metadata obtained with the help of the rphylopic R package,
\url{https://github.com/sckott/rphylopic}):

\LTcapwidth=\textwidth
%% \singlespacing
\begin{footnotesize}
\begin{longtable}{>{\RaggedRight}m{3.2cm}>{\RaggedRight}p{6.5cm}>{\RaggedRight}p{5.0cm}}
%\caption{Phylopic credits}\\
\toprule
\input{blackswans/analysis/phylopic.tex}
\label{tab:phylopic}
\end{longtable}
\end{footnotesize}
%% \onehalfspacing


% %\baselinestretch}{\tighttextstretch}
% \normalsize
% \bibliographystyle{apalike}
% \bibliography{/Users/seananderson/Dropbox/tex/jshort,/Users/seananderson/Dropbox/tex/ref3}
% %\baselinestretch}{\textstretch}
% \normalsize
%
% ------------------------------
% Supplemental Tables
% ------------------------------

\clearpage
%\thetable}{S\arabic{table}}
%table}{0}

\begin{table}
\begin{footnotesize}

\caption[Summary statistics for the filtered Global Population Dynamics
  Database time series arranged by taxonomic class.]{Summary statistics for the filtered Global Population Dynamics
  Database time series arranged by taxonomic class. Columns are: number of
  populations, number of taxonomic orders, numbers of species, median time
  series length, total number of interpolated time steps, total number of
  substituted zeros, and total number of time steps.}

\smallskip
\begin{tabular}{lrrrrrrrr}
\toprule
\input{blackswans/analysis/stat-table.tex}
\label{tab:stats}
\end{tabular}
\end{footnotesize}
\end{table}

\clearpage

\LTcapwidth=\textwidth
\bibpunct{}{}{;}{a}{}{;}

%% \singlespacing
\begin{footnotesize}
\begin{longtable}{>{\RaggedRight}m{1.4cm}>{\RaggedRight}p{3.3cm}>{\RaggedRight}p{0.7cm}>{\RaggedRight}p{1.5cm}>{\RaggedRight}p{3.0cm}>{\RaggedRight}p{1.4cm}>{\RaggedRight}p{1.25cm}}

\caption[All populations with Pr$(\nu < 10) > 0.5$ in the base heavy-tailed
  Gompertz population dynamics model.]{All populations with Pr$(\nu < 10) > 0.5$ in the base heavy-tailed
  Gompertz population dynamics model. Shown are the log abundance time series,
  population descriptions, Global Population Dynamics Database Main IDs,
  citation for the data source or separate verification literature, a
  description of the cause of the black swan events (if known), the
  probability of heavy tails as calculated by our model, and median estimate
  of $\nu$ from our model with 90\% quantile credible intervals indicated in
  parentheses. Red dots on the time series indicate downward black-swan events
  and blue values indicate upward black-swan events that have a $10 \cdot
  10^{-4}$ probability or less of occurring if the population dynamics were
  explained by a Gompertz model with normally distributed process noise with a
  standard deviation equal to the scale parameter in the fitted t
  distribution.}\\

\toprule
\input{blackswans/analysis/cause-table.tex}
\label{tab:causes-supp}
\end{longtable}
\end{footnotesize}
%% \onehalfspacing

% ------------------------------
% Supplemental Figures
% ------------------------------

%\thefigure}{S\arabic{figure}}
%figure}{0}

\begin{centering}
\clearpage
\includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{blackswans/analysis/all-clean-ts-mammals.pdf}\\
Figure~\ref{fig:all-ts} (mammals) continued on next page \ldots

\clearpage
\includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{blackswans/analysis/all-clean-ts-birds.pdf}\\
Figure~\ref{fig:all-ts} (birds) continued on next page \ldots

\clearpage
\includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{blackswans/analysis/all-clean-ts-insects.pdf}\\
Figure~\ref{fig:all-ts} (insects) continued on next page \ldots

\end{centering}

\begin{figure}[htbp]
\begin{center}
\includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{blackswans/analysis/all-clean-ts-fishes-others.pdf}

\caption[All filtered time series used in our analysis.]{(fishes, crustaceans,
  gastropods, sharks). All filtered time series used in our analysis. The
  abundances are shown on a log10 vertical axis. Throughout this figure, red
  dots indicate values that were interpolated and blue dots indicate values
  that were recorded as zero but were set to the next lowest observed
  abundance. Numbers before each species name are the GPDD Main ID numbers.}

\label{fig:all-ts}
\end{center}
\end{figure}

\clearpage

\begin{figure}[htbp]
\begin{center}
\includegraphics[width=0.8\textwidth]{blackswans/analysis/priors-gomp-base.pdf}

\caption[Probability density of the Bayesian priors for the Gompertz models.]{
  Probability density of the Bayesian priors for the Gompertz models. From
  left to right and then top to bottom: (1) per capita growth rate at
  $\log$(abundance) = $0$: $\lambda \sim \mathrm{Normal}(0, 10^2)$; (2) scale
  parameter of t-distribution process noise: $\sigma \sim \mathrm{Half\mhyphen
    Cauchy} (0, 2.5)$; (3) t-distribution degrees of freedom parameter: $\nu
  \sim \mathrm{Truncated\mhyphen Exponential}(0.01, \mathrm{min.} = 2)$; (4)
  AR1 correlation coefficient of residuals: $\phi \sim \mathrm{Truncated
    \mhyphen Normal}(0, 1, \mathrm{min.} = -1, \mathrm{max.} = 1)$. Not shown
  is $b$, the density dependence parameter: $b \sim \mathrm{Uniform}(-1, 2)$.
  The $\nu$ panel also shows two alternative priors: a weaker prior $\nu \sim
  \mathrm{Truncated\mhyphen Exponential}(0.005, \mathrm{min.} = 2)$, and a
  stronger prior $\nu \sim \mathrm{Truncated\mhyphen Exponential}(0.02,
  \mathrm{min.} = 2)$. The inset panel shows the same data but with a
  log-transformed x axis. Note that the base and weaker priors are relatively
  flat within the region of $\nu < 20$ that we are concerned with. }

\label{fig:priors}
\end{center}
\end{figure}

\clearpage

\begin{figure}[htbp]
\begin{center}
\includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{blackswans/analysis/gomp-comparison.pdf}

\caption[Estimates of $\nu$ from alternative models plotted against the base
Gompertz model estimates of $\nu$.]{Estimates of $\nu$ from alternative models
  plotted against the base Gompertz model estimates of $\nu$. Shown are
  medians of the posterior (dots) and 50\% credible intervals (segments). The
  diagonal line indicates a one-to-one relationship. Different colours
  indicate various taxonomic classes. The grey-shaded regions indicate regions
  of disagreement if $\nu = 10$ is taken as a threshold of heavy-tailed
  dynamics. The Gompertz observation error model assumes a fixed standard
  deviation of observation error of $0.2$ on a log scale.}

\label{fig:alt}
\end{center}
\end{figure}

\clearpage

\begin{figure}[htbp]
\begin{center}
\includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{blackswans/analysis/gomp-prior-comparison.pdf}

\caption[Estimates of $\nu$ from Gompertz models with alternative priors on
$\nu$.]{Estimates of $\nu$ from Gompertz models with alternative priors on
  $\nu$. Shown are medians of the posterior (dots) and 50\% credible intervals
  (segments). The diagonal line indicates a one-to-one relationship. Different
  colours indicate various taxonomic classes. The grey-shaded regions indicate
  regions of disagreement if $\nu = 10$ is taken as a threshold of
  heavy-tailed dynamics. The base, weaker, and stronger priors on $\nu$ are
  illustrated in Fig.~\ref{fig:priors}. In general, the estimates are nearly
  identical in cases where the data are informative about low values of $\nu$.
  When the data are less informative about low values of $\nu$, the prior can
  slightly pull the estimates of $\nu$ towards higher or lower values.}

\label{fig:alt-priors}
\end{center}
\end{figure}

\clearpage

\begin{figure}[htbp]
\begin{center}
\includegraphics[width=0.8\textwidth]{blackswans/analysis/t-dist-sampling-sim-prior-exp0point01.pdf}
\includegraphics[width=0.8\textwidth]{blackswans/analysis/t-dist-sampling-sim-sigma-prior-exp0point01.pdf}

\caption[Testing the ability to estimate $\nu$  and the scale parameter of the
process deviations for a given number of samples drawn from a distribution
with a given true $\nu$ value.]{Testing the ability to estimate $\nu$ (top
  panels) and the scale parameter of the process deviations (bottom panels)
  for a given number of samples (columns) drawn from a distribution with a
  given true $\nu$ value (rows). The red lines indicate the true population
  value. When a small number of samples are drawn there may not be samples
  sufficiently far into the tails to recapture the true $\nu$ value; however,
  heavy tails are still distinguished from normal tails in most cases, even
  with only 25 or 50 samples.}

\label{fig:sim-nu}
\end{center}
\end{figure}

\clearpage

\begin{figure}[htbp]
\begin{center}
\includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{blackswans/analysis/sim-gompertz-median-dist.pdf}
\includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{blackswans/analysis/sim-gompertz-p10.pdf}

\caption[Simulation testing the Gompertz estimation model when the process
deviation draws were chosen so that $\nu$ could be estimated close to the true
value outside the full population model (``effective $\nu$'' within a CV of
0.2 of specified $\nu$).]{Simulation testing the Gompertz estimation model
  when the process deviation draws were chosen so that $\nu$ could be
  estimated close to the true value outside the full population model
  (``effective $\nu$'' within a CV of 0.2 of specified $\nu$). Upper panels
  show the distribution of median $\widehat{\nu}$ across 20 simulation runs.
  Lower panels show the distribution of Pr($\nu < 10$) across 20 simulation
  runs. We ran the simulations across three population (``true'') $\nu$ values
  (3, 5, and $1\cdot 10^9$, i.e.\ approximately normal) and four scenarios:
  (1) 100 time steps and no observation error, (2) 50 time steps and no
  observation error, (3) 50 time steps and observation error drawn from
  $\mathrm{Normal} (0,
  0.2^2)$ but ignored, and (4) 50 time steps with observation error in which
    the quantity of observation error was assumed known. Within each scenario
    the dots represent stochastic draws from the true population distributions
    combined with model fits. Underlayed boxplots show the median,
    interquartile range, and $1.5$ times the interquartile range. }

\label{fig:sim-prob}
\end{center}
\end{figure}

\clearpage

\noindent
Example Stan code for a heavy-tailed Gompertz model with AR1 correlated
residuals and a specified level of observation error. The specific code for
used for the various models in our analysis is available at
\url{https://github.com/seananderson/heavy-tails}.

%% \begin{spacing}{1.15}
\begin{footnotesize}
\begin{verbatim}
data {
  int<lower=3> N;              // number of observations
  vector[N] y;                 // vector to hold ln abundance observations
  real<lower=0> nu_rate;       // rate parameter for nu exponential prior
}
parameters {
  real lambda;                 // Gompertz growth rate parameter
  real<lower=-1, upper=2> b;   // Gompertz density dependence parameter
  real<lower=0> sigma_proc;    // process noise scale parameter
  real<lower=2> nu;            // t-distribution degrees of freedom
  real<lower=-1, upper=1> phi; // AR1 parameter
  vector[N] U;                 // unobserved states
  real<lower=0> sigma_obs;     // specified observation error SD
}
transformed parameters {
  vector[N] epsilon;           // error terms
  epsilon[1] <- 0;
  for (i in 2:N) {
    epsilon[i] <- U[i] - (lambda + b * U[i - 1])
                       - (phi * epsilon[i - 1]);
  }
}
model {
  // priors:
  nu ~ exponential(nu_rate);
  lambda ~ normal(0, 10);
  sigma_proc ~ cauchy(0, 2.5);
  phi ~ normal(0, 1);
  // data model:
  for (i in 2:N) {
    U[i] ~ student_t(nu,
                     lambda + b * U[i - 1]
                     + phi * epsilon[i - 1],
                     sigma_proc);
  }
  y ~ normal(U, sigma_obs);
}
\end{verbatim}
\end{footnotesize}

\clearpage
\noindent
Stan code for the multilevel beta regression:
\begin{footnotesize}
\verbatiminput{blackswans/analysis/betareg4.stan}
\end{footnotesize}

\clearpage

\noindent
The GPDD IDs used in our analysis.

%\baselinestretch}{\tighttextstretch}
\normalsize
\begin{footnotesize}
\noindent
{\tt
\input{blackswans/analysis/mainids}
}
\end{footnotesize}
%\baselinestretch}{\textstretch}
\normalsize
%% \end{spacing}
